Awesome morning. Welcome.
We are here to hear from the PSA in its various
forms
on the Employment Leave Bill. We have allocated 30 minutes for your
various different
perspectives, I suppose. You don't have to use all that time, and it does include
time for questions.
Great.
So we'll hand over to you now. Thank you.
Cool. Well, first of all, thank you so much for accommodating us for 30 minutes.
It does give you the opportunity to hear from a range of different workers about
the impact of this bill. I'm going to just speak very briefly and then
hand over to them. And I guess the key thing that I want to get
across to you is that this bill will make
the lives of workers materially worse.
And in our view, no member of Parliament comes to Wellington from their home
week after week wanting to make the lives of working people worse.
But this is what this bill will do if it's passed.
And I really want to appeal to particularly National Party MPs,
some of whom have privately expressed reservations about pay
equity, and the fact that they didn't understand the full horror and extent of
what was happening, partly because there wasn't a select committee like this.
But there's no excuses when it comes to this bill, and that's why we
genuinely want you to listen carefully to the workers who are going to
speak with you today. Those are workers from hospitals, who work on our
borders, who work in our meat works, care and support workers, local
government workers. And we'll also give you the opportunity to hear from an
organizer for workers in this very building.
Because we want you to be under no illusion that this
bill should not go through, that it is a Brooke van Velden special.
It is another attack on working people by Brooke van Velden before she
leaves this place, and we want you to oppose it.
And we think that it is consistent with National Party
positions over many, many years when it comes to workers.
Supporting this bill would be an aberration from a National Party position,
and we're really asking you to reflect on the fact that you were
elected on the basis that you would have a laser-like focus on the cost of
living.This will make the cost of living worse
in a material respect for specific workers.
And Grace has done a lot of work with the workers who are going to speak with you
today about the precise impact of this
bill on them. And so we've done calculations based on
how this bill would play out for these workers, because we want you to
hear in direct terms what the impact will be, and we really
hope that you will reconsider your support for this bill after you've
heard these workers' stories. And just finally, we are asking every member of
Parliament to sign a pledge. The pledge is that you support the rights of all
workers to have time off work, and that all workers need annual leave, sick
leave, bereavement leave, and family violence leave, and that you will not support
any bill that reduces entitlements to leave.
Now, we don't think that should be a controversial proposition, that's why we've
sent it to every single member of Parliament, and we're really hoping that we can
get support for that.
I'm just going to hand over now, and these workers have all lined up in order,
so we're hoping it will go smoothly.
But the first person, and hopefully they don't need me to introduce in between,
the first worker is Laura Lusk, who hopefully, Laura, are
you
online?
If she's-
She just needs to accept the request to become a panelist.
Oh, okay. We might-
Sometimes it doesn't make sense because you don't know what a panelist means.
That's okay.
But that's it.
We might jump on to Mary Vicker then, and
go back to Laura if she's able to jump in in between. But I can see Mary there.
Hand over to Mary now.
Thank you. Hi, I'm Mary. I'm a charge nurse at a
youth inpatient facility under Te Whatu Ora.
Like most workers in inpatient mental health units, I work pretty frequent
overtime and very antisocial hours.
The changes to leave in this bill would cut my pay in a way that I can't really
afford.
I alternate between morning shifts and evening shifts, and I get penal
rates for the last few hours of my evening shifts.
Those penal rates start at 8:00 PM.
Under this bill, that would mean a $1,300 annual pay cut for me.
I also work overtime when my unit's busy.
My colleagues and I work double shifts of 16 hours or more, and extra
shifts to keep each other and our tangata whaiora safe.
My caseload means that I often work for an hour or more after the end of my
shift in addition to that.
The additional payment I get for working overtime would no longer be reflected in
my leave pay under the proposals in this bill.
That would mean at least a $1,400 pay cut.
There's a cost of living crisis going on at the moment.
Petrol's more than $3.30 a liter. I'm not sure how I'm supposed to be
able to afford around a $2,700 pay cut
annually. All of which would come when I took annual leave or sick leave.
I'm paying a mortgage on my own, so I'd have to really consider whether I could
afford to take much, if any, leave,
which doesn't bode well given the high rates of burnout in my field.
Caring for young people in mental health crisis is essential work for our
communities. It's because we work such long and unsocial hours that the
changes in this bill would decrease our access to leave and pay on leave.
To me, this just isn't fair.
I'm not sure if you want to hand back to Laura or on to Georgina.
Is Laura there? I can't see her.
I think Laura's just switching devices.
So if we want to go on to Georgina, that would be great.
Okay. Thank you.
Kia ora koutou. I am Georgina Hana.
I'm a health protection officer in the National Public Health Service that comes
under Te Whatu Ora as well.
We work to keep our community safe, ensure ships and airplanes don't bring in
infectious disease, respond when water isn't safe to swim in or
collect kaimoana, and contract trace diseases
like meningitis. We are on call week by week,
and we get an on-call allowance, and often work 10 to 25
extra hours overtime in an on-call
week, depending on what is happening.
We work
like this to keep New Zealand safe.
Every part of New Zealand needs a health protection officer available
24/7. Threats to New Zealanders' health can
happen at any time.
At the moment, when I go on leave, my on-call allowance and overtime is
reflected in my pay. But if I was paid the way this
bill was suggested, I'd be paid $400 less a week
when I went on leave than I am now. Some of this would
be offset by the leave compensation payment, but most
wouldn't. This bill would mean a 1,400
a year pay cut just from the changes to annual
leave.
A couple of years ago, I was burnt out from
doing extra on-call and overtime,
and I had to be off work for a couple of months and return to
work gradually due to the sickness I had acquired.
And the extra on-call, the extra
allowance in my leave meant that I could
pay for medical bills and still have food coming in and cover all
my other daily bills as well, and that provided me a
lot of
financial relief during a really hard time
from there. But also I didn't get financially
stressed during that time as well.
So I think for a lot of people, especially with the cost of living,
and may acquire something like what I went
through, that could add extra stress instead of
being a savior in that aspect.
Thank you for listening.
And was going to pass over... Now I'm going to pass over to Helen Foley,
or is Laura back?
I think we've got Laura now. Hi, Laura. Over to you.
Kia ora. My name is Laura Lusk. I hope you can hear me.
We can.
So I work as a care and support worker.
I was meant to go first because I'm supposed to see a client at 8:30, but we'll
make that happen.
I work 36 guaranteed hours a fortnight, and normally I'll pick up
another 10 to 20 additional hours on most weeks.
The whole system of care relies on people like me picking up extra shifts.
If I work on a public holiday, it's a shorter day because clients don't receive
house cleaning on a public holiday.
So an eight-hour day with two four-hour split shifts can become a four-hour
day with two two-hour split shifts.
At the moment, we also get a day in lieu.
That day is why people work on holidays with reduced hours.
Under this bill, we would only get four hours in lieu on a day like that.
When we work on public holidays, we're looking after other people rather than
spending time with our own families.
We deserve a day in lieu for that service to other people and sacrificing Christmas
morning with our own children to make sure that others are safe.
Right now, I get 10 days' sick leave. That's about 70 hours a year.
Under this bill, that would be cut to 36 hours a year, even though I
work on average 33 hours a week.
Also, if we have less sick leave, we won't take time off for mild
illnesses. The problem with that is that what's mild for us isn't
mild for someone in their 90s.
The average age of clients where I work is 81.
Older people get sick easily,
and if we don't get the sick leave that we need, clients are going to get sick.
I'm not sure who it is that I need to hand over to next.
Helen. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Thanks, Laura. Mōrena koutou. I'm Helen Foley.
I'm a delegate at Oranga Tamariki, where I've worked for 19
years. And I'm a registered social worker.
So the care and protection of children and young people doesn't stop when our
offices close at 5:00.
And children need protection at all hours of the day and night.
And a large part of our workforce at Oranga Tamariki, excuse me, works
overtime and on call to ensure that concerns for
safety of tamariki or rangatahi can be responded to,
at 5:00 on a Friday and 2:00 a.m. on
a Sunday morning.
This happens up and down the country in large cities and rural towns,
and this bill is proposing that the allowance that our members
get for being on call is no longer part of their payment when on leave.
Some workers are on call from Monday through to Sunday for a whole week.
That's one example, but our members will do much more than that during the course
of a year. And if the on-call allowance is not included as part of their leave pay,
then a worker who just did one week of on call a year would be
$45 a year worse off. But we can multiply that by four,
five, six times, seven times,
depending on the amount of on call that our members do.
The more on-call
work that our members do, the worse off they'll be as part of these proposals.
So we're urging you to please don't cut the pay of people who do vital work to
ensure the safety of children and young people.
This work, being on call and overtime, impacts on our members' time
with their own families,
and takes them away from their downtime from work.
But our members care about the work that they do and don't deserve to be worse
off when they're providing such a vital service, an important
service for Aotearoa, New Zealand.
And these proposed changes would diminish the value of our members' work
and our members doing the work. So thank you for your time today, and I think I'm
handing over to Andrea McLachlan.
Sorry.
Can you hear me?
Yep.
Fabulous. My name is Andrea McLachlan.
I am a regional data collection specialist
and PSA delegate for my colleagues in this
area. Sounds like a really flash title, but what it
means is that we ask people questions and
record their answers. So my
job is to visit randomly chosen
addresses, and we do that in person
despite the health and safety risks that may
exist. But Stats gives us great health and
safety training and resources, so for
the most part, we do the job, which is to get
completed surveys, which then become
statistically dependable data.
So I'm guaranteed 37.5 hours
per fortnight. That's not
enough. I have an orphaned grandson I am
raising, and to be responsible for him at
a time when I have a Gold Card means
that I am working every single additional
hour I can.
So the leave compensation payment is
such that we basically, in terms of half
of our work, are fine. That's Stats'
responsibility.
With additional hours that we have to work, because there aren't
enough of us to do it without additional
hours, we are our own accountants.
We have to take the LCP, divide
it up somehow, and put those pots of
money away for when we ask for
leave.
So we are treated differently from
everyone else in Stats who is on a
salary,
and I'm trying to understand why.
I appreciate your time, and I will now hand over to
Ross Campbell.
Good morning. I'm Ross Campbell. I work for Department of Corrections,
principal corrections officer. Actually at work at the moment.
So
I
value the opportunity to speak as part of the PSA national delegate for
Corrections.
I'm going to share a personal experience to you that happened to me
back in 2001 when I had an accident,
and I was off for approximately two and a half years.
And then I followed that by at least six months
return to work into the job that I'm into now.
Throughout that time,
this injury ended up by losing my leg.
So,
I needed that financial support during that time.
So sick days,
and ACC days, or annual leave days I should say,
were always there to
prop up my income to 100%, which without that
I would never achieved what we are today.
So as a result, I was able to go back to work,
and
this bill will take that away from when you're on long-term ACC, you will not be
accumulating leave, you will not be accumulating
annual leave of any sort. I still rely on that now for medical
appointments and to the limb center
10 to 15 times a year.
But what it did was it allowed me to come back to the job, spend another 20 years
in this job, so I've done over 40 years now.
Also, I want to bring in the fact that as the nurses
and everybody else has already stated,
corrections officers work night shift.
They work on overtime, and they rely on that for a steady
income, especially in today's crisis as is at the moment.
And we're finding more and more times today it's harder to keep the prisons
running because of staff sickness and all the rest of it.
Without these,
if this act comes in, I can
say it's just going to be detrimental to the department.
So yeah. I'd like to hand over now to
Ross Thorburn.
Thank you.
Morena. My name is Ross Thorburn. I represent the meat
inspectors in the meat industry.
The meat industry is a multi-billion-dollar industry for New Zealand.
We were essential workers during COVID,
and we're entrusted for keeping our meat industry compliant and to
meet overseas market access requirements.
We have to cover all the shifts that the meat companies work, which
includes day shifts, night shifts, swing shifts, weekend shifts, and we
do a hell of a lot of overtime. A full-time meat
inspector earns approximately an $81,000
salary, but just about all the meat inspectors do a lot of
overtime to keep the freezing works running, and it takes our yearly
salary to roughly just over 100,000.
We end up relying on that to live. Our pay comes in, our bills go out,
et cetera.
We receive additional payments as, and a lot of allowances because
we have to rotate through the shifts that the freezing works work,
and so work day shift, night shift on a rotational basis.
For unsocial hours, we receive $4 a fifty an hour before midnight, $7
after midnight. These unsociable hours payments are part of our
work, and that payment is part of our pay.
Under this proposal, we wouldn't receive any of those allowances when we go on
leave.
And there are some shifts where workers will be paid $100 less when they get sick,
if had they have worked.
So it will discourage people from taking sick leave.
Last year, PSA members at Assure Quality received over 800,000 in that
year of unsocial hours payments. If we don't get those payments while we
are sick and annual leave, that would almost be
100,000 total cut from the PSA members' pay.
We just can't afford that.
People are struggling as it is.
Thank you for your time. I'd like to hand over to Andrew Macaulay.
Thanks, Ross. And can we go now to
Trish, please, from Out at PSA.
Morena koutou.
Ko Patricia Lasateviakoho.
I'm here representing Out at PSA, which is the PSA's network
dedicated to supporting and uplifting whānau, ani-wanua, and rainbow
members.
Out at PSA really wants to emphasize that workers who are already
marginalized in the workplace will lose the most from this bill.
For whānau, ani-wanua workers, leave is critical
for managing mental health, recovering from burnout, and accessing
gender-affirming healthcare, which often requires time away from work.
Whānau, ani-wanua workers are already more likely to face pay
gaps, housing insecurity, and financial precarity, and we
cannot afford pay cuts at a cost of living crisis.
Thank you for your time. I will now pass on to Tyler Proctor from PSA Youth.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you, Trish.
Ko Tyler Proctor toku iko.
I'm the national co-convener for the PSA Youth's executive, and
I am a teaching administrator at Ōtākou Whakaīhu
Waka, Otago University.
Young people, especially those who are studying,
far more often than not work jobs with short and casual tenures, and that's things
like hospitality, retail, and gig work, which bear the brunt of
this legislation.
If we get sick, we need to take leave.
What we need isn't a couple of extra dollars, it's that we
have the time and space to rest and heal without losing our income and
stability. There's already a growing trend of young people moving
overseas where there's better pay, better jobs,
and this proposed legislation signals to the rangatahi still here in Aotearoa
that things aren't going to actually get better at all.
I'm not a subject expert, but I talk to young people across the motu every
day about their challenges, and it's obvious to everybody
that the Holidays Act needs reform
But it needs to focus on people instead of profit.
So ngā mihi, thank you for your time and consideration.
I will pass on to Eleanor, who I believe is here in person. Kia ora.
Hi there. I'm Eleanor Hegarty-Drummond, and I'm a librarian at Wellington
City Council.
I want to emphasize how many workers working in local government
will be affected by these changes because they work on call or
overtime serving their community.
For example, library workers like me, community workers,
park rangers, park and compliance officers, environmental
health officers, transport and infrastructure workers who ensure
building consent and compliance, workers who ensure our digital systems
work, and our Hapū Ápē community wellbeing team.
So they help the city to keep on running, essentially.
We need these workers. None of these workers can afford cuts to their
pay or leave in a cost of living crisis.
Kia ora koutou. I'm Don Barry, and this is Daniel Scott,
and we are meteorologists at MetService.
We both work in the aviation team there, keeping the planes in the air.
And this is a 24/7 operation.
It's imperative that for operational safety, for everybody in
the air and also working at the airfields,
that we have human beings writing these forecasts
and providing
their input.
We
need to take enough leave to be well-rested to work at the best of our ability.
That is
undeniable.
We often get paid overtime for working additional hours, and we also get an
allowance for working antisocial hours.
Under the approach to leave in this bill, this allowance would never be reflected
in our leave pay because it's expressed as an allowance rather than as a change to
our base rate salaries. We're particularly concerned about the impact on our
members taking sick leave, family violence leave, or bereavement leave.
For example, we have a nine-hour shift that goes from 2:30 p.m.
till 11:30 p.m. At the moment, if someone's on bereavement leave, they'll still get
the antisocial allowance. But if someone was scheduled for that shift and then
suffered a bereavement under the system proposed in this current bill, they'd be
paid around $116 less per day than they would if
they worked. People shouldn't be paid less because they need to take sick leave,
family violence leave, or bereavement leave.
We're also really worried that this would make people less likely to take that sick
leave, like other people have mentioned.
That affects both them on an individual wellbeing level, but also
compromises the quality of operations, putting both industry profit
and the wellbeing and safety of people in these industries
at risk.
Yes, and under these proposals as well, meteorologists will be paid less
on annual leave than what they are now.
And annual leave is crucial for us to be able to take that
R&R to recover from these unsociable hours.
We looked at one example and found that just over four
days, $340 less is what
meteorologists would get if they took annual leave.
We wouldn't be able to pay our current rent, our mortgages,
and
also those who are international hires, we have a lot of international
meteorologists, those who come from overseas will struggle to be able to afford to
go back home.
Next slide.
Kia ora. I'm Stephanie Lambourne.
I'm the PSA organizer who supports and represents the workers that work
here at Parliament, both for the service and the office.
I'm going to talk through two examples today.
There are many examples across the service and the office of workers
who will be impacted by this legislation.
The staff who are here today providing procedural and administrative support
to select committees are impartial and politically neutral and work
hard to support the functions of Parliament.
This and any select committee is only possible because of their support.
Staff often work overtime to ensure committees receive the support that you
expect
and to ensure committees are able to undertake the hearings and meetings that you
wish to hold. When submissions arrive, they must be triaged,
collated, and distributed to members, and each oral submissions have to be
arranged. This happens at the same time staff are doing all the other elements
of their work, often resulting in staff working overtime.
Parliament always relies on security, both PSOs and
CROs, to keep you safe.
Overtime is used often to support important events such as Budget
Day coming up next month,
and for other large events. But also when staff are unwell or have leave
arranged, overtime is used to provide them cover.
This bill would cap pay for everyone who works
overtime. For every hour of overtime a
PSO or a CRO works, they'll lose at least
$1.50 of pay just through overtime, and that doesn't include
other allowances that they receive as part of their pay due to the
changes of this bill.
I ask you as committee members, are you able to look at the workers
you've already walked past this morning,
who support and protect you,
and in the eye and say, "This committee has agreed to cap their
pay in a cost of living crisis."
Thanks so much for the opportunity.
I hope it's become clear that this is a core union issue.
We won't give up on this. We will be campaigning on this, particularly if
it goes through. But we really hope that that's not necessary,
and that the report back from this select committee carefully considers in a
granular way what this bill would mean for workers, and
declines to make the changes that will make working people's lives
worse. And we're really hoping and we're putting a lot of faith in you that you
will do that. And
it's not easy for these workers to come, and obviously there's a lot of
protection when you come to a select committee.
They can say more here than they would be able to in the media, and we've taken the
preparation for today very seriously because we're really hoping that we can make a
difference in the approach to this bill. Happy to take any questions.
Anybody, yes.
Thank you very much. I do appreciate it. I have a question from Carl Bates already.
Thanks, Chair, and thanks for the stories and the examples that you've
shared. You've made the point that you're going to campaign heavily on
this issue. In the examples that you're
sharing, in that process, are you going to make sure that the
numbers accurately reflect
the impact for workers? So if I take the one example here,
lower pay while leave reduces workers' access to
leave.
Mm-hmm.
You've got the person normally earns
2,000, or would normally earn $2,700,
$50 more a week.
You then say she,
he or she,
would go on annual leave and only earn 2,000 a week,
$700 less a week. But what you don't factor in
is the $50 more a week for the 48 weeks a year she works, so
therefore she would be $400 a week in this
example. Sorry, $400 a year less off.
So you've-
Yeah
... significantly over-dramatized the impact
on that worker through the way you've represented that story.
I would say that there are two different points that we want to make there, and I
will say we will be very clear about the different points.
So one point is the overall amount that people get in a pay cut, and we
are
calculating those, and we are being really clear about that.
The second calculation is the amount less
that they'll be paid on leave than they will normally,
and we are not representing those as the same thing.
The point we are making is that if you are paid less when you go on
leave, that reduces your ability to take leave because all
your APs and everything goes out. So we absolutely will not
represent. We will make that difference about the leave compensation
payment. But the point that we want to make is that moving, and this is the
point that particularly
Andrea was making about stats, that it doesn't work for workers to be
paid more when they do extra hours and less when they go on leave, because they
cannot afford that difference, and it means that they can't take leave.
So that, yeah. We're not representing those as the same
thing. We just want to be really clear that
even those workers who are not receiving an absolute pay cut, who do additional
hours,
the bill still doesn't work for them.
Okay. So it'll be good to have that full story there, and I appreciate that.
My second question is, we've heard a number of stories about the impact on these
workers and their earnings.
Mm-hmm.
And I just want to understand if the union's going to be consistent in your view on
how we support workers like all of the people that have spoken this morning in
terms of their incomes. This person's earning $140,000 a
year.
Mm-hmm.
So under the tax cuts provided to them under this government, they got an
extra thousand dollars a year in their pocket.
Just want to know if the union supported that direct support to these workers.
Is that relevant to this bill?
Absolutely not.
Relevant to this bill.
Absolutely not. And it is a pretty sad day.
So you're not consistent in how we support workers.
It is a pretty sad time-
Carl
Yes, go on
... if you are comparing your tax cuts with something that you're now proposing to
take away, and I'm very surprised by that position. Is that the official position?
No, I'm asking if you're consistent-
So can I-
... in your support for workers
Absolutely not.
Carl, we just need to move on to the next person.
Have you any-
The tax cuts were dangerous and damaging, and we're still paying the price.
Okay. So one of the stories from Andrea pointed out
that
she was receiving a wage when she'd prefer to get a salary.
And so here, I'm just wanting to understand what's the
problem that we're trying to solve here is about
people actually wanting a salary
when they're getting the benefits of having a per
hour wage. And how do you as a union
kind of work through that tension?
Because there's a benefit to being on a salary and
getting paid consistently all the time, which usually demands that
you have some flexibility about when you might work.
And sometimes you get paid an additional background
payment. But actually having penal rates
for working those after hours and things like that,
that's quite
a difference than most people who work in the public sector, for example, nurses in
the public sector, and the private sector be part of.
Whereas nurses working in the private sector do not get rates, and the
difference now in salary between
nurses who are working in
privately funded areas versus
the public sector is quite large because of those penal
rates. But at the same time, it sounds like the unions now
also want to have benefits for their workers of being
salaried, whilst also having the benefits of being waged.
Pardon me.
Yes, we do, and we want pay equity.
Right.
And we disagree that those workers shouldn't get paid.
They want their cake and they want to eat the money.
But what you're doing, if you support this bill, is you're making their lives
worse, and that's on you if you do that.
I accept that point.
Can I just ask one final question? Because we have run out of time, but
really appreciate the opportunity we've had to hear the spectrum of
positions. What is your
take on or perspective on the impact on taxpayers and
the case of what you're explaining when the organization, be
it
MetService or Health New Zealand, having to pay
the on-call allowance
to the person that's on leave, as well as an on-call allowance for
someone that's then taking that call or being on call while that person's on
leave?
Well, that's baked in now.
Yes.
And yeah.
Yeah.
And
we're already by the arrangements that are
already set in place have set New Zealand up to be a low-wage economy.
So actually, the conversation we should be having is how we increase all of those
allowances and how we increase that pay.
Great labor practices, yeah.
But what you're doing, if you support this bill, is making it
so much worse for each of those publicly funded areas.
And the reason it's important that you heard from the wide range of workers is that
we're talking about essential workers, people in prisons, people who support our
borders, people who do care and support in people's homes, meat
inspectors, social workers, absolutely critical workers that I
don't think any of you would stand up at an election meeting in your local areas
and say that you'd support a pay cut for.
And if you wouldn't do that, then don't support this bill.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Appreciate your time.
Really appreciate the people that are online that have made themselves available,
who are part of the process.
Yes, thank you. Thanks, everyone.
Thank you.
I had to take Jenny's online mail.
Thank you. Yes.
Thanks, Duncan.
Oops, we shouldn't It's
enough.
Good.
Awesome.
Have you signed up for a year income?
Seconded.
Um.
This one.
One second.
My week is on Saturday.
Okay.
I'm all right. Thank you.
Good
morning, Minister.
Good morning.
I
would like to welcome you to our select committee to speak to us on the bill that
we have been hearing from
people on, Employment Leave Bill, as I should probably stipulate because we've got
a couple of your bills with us.
Eve, just to check, is this our last hearing?
Have we had every hearing now, or have we got further?
We will be holding hearings on the fourth.
Oh, that's right. Okay. So I say this, not that we're hearing you at the end of
everything, in the middle.
Uh-huh.
Just that's helpful context. So we will still be hearing from a few more
people, but we've already had a sort of a day of hearings.
And so appreciate the chance for you to share your perspective and for us to be
able to ask some questions. So we'll leave it to you now.
Great. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
Look, the Employment Leave Bill replaces the Holidays Act
2003, a law that has become virtually unworkable,
and I thank you, in advance of the work that you're doing.
The bill is technical,
and your scrutiny helps ensure the drafting matches the policy
intent and works in practice.
The bill aims to do three main things: make the rules
easier to apply to modern working arrangements,
give employees and employers more certainty about entitlements
and obligations, and reduce the errors that have led to
widespread non-compliance and costly remediation processes.
This matters because people work in many different ways.
Fixed rosters, variable hours, overtime, and casual work,
and the leave system needs to work for all of them.
Clear rules help employers, including small business
owners and payroll teams, apply the law and help employees
understand what it is that they are entitled to.
The bill makes clear practical changes to how leave is earned and paid.
The key features are a new framework for earning and
paying leave based on three types of work hours, standard,
additional, and casual.
Annual leave and sick leave accrue in hours against standard hours.
Leave accrues from day one, so there are no more complex
annual entitlement rules, and employees will be able to take leave
when they need it from the start of their employment.
Accrual means that sick leave, like annual leave, is proportionate to
how much an employee works, rather than all employees getting
the same lump sum entitlement.
Additional and casual hours earn an upfront leave
compensation payment of 12.5% instead of
accruing annual or sick leave. It is designed to reduce
calculation error while maintaining core entitlements and
keeping things simple for both standard and variable hours.
Leave is paid at a single hourly leave pay rate,
replacing multiple competing calculations.
New parents will receive their full pay when they take annual leave after
returning from parental leave.
Transitional provisions provide rules to convert existing leave
balances into hours and help resolve outstanding Holidays Act
remediation. Once the
bill is passed, employers and payroll providers will have
two years to prepare, supported by guidance from MBIE.
This is a major change, and the transition needs to be done quite
carefully.
There will be areas where employers are likely to benefit most from the
changes, and areas where employees are likely to benefit
most. For many people, however, leave entitlements will
stay much the same. What changes is how they are
calculated, and many people won't notice the difference day to
day. I'm aware that many people engaging with the bill
will be thinking about how entitlements compare with the current act,
but the two systems are hard to compare because they account
for leave in different ways.
I want to emphasize that employers will still be able to offer
more generous leave entitlements and rates of leave pay as
these are the minimum standards.
I know many employers do this now and will continue to do
so under the new law.
The bottom line is simple. For every hour worked, an
employee will either build paid time off or
receive payment in lieu of leave. LCP
shifts the timing of leave pay for variable hours to
when hours are worked rather than when an employee takes
time off. I've heard some concern that LCP
will limit employees' ability to take time away from work.
It is not designed to do thisBy definition,
LCP is paid on hours the employee is not required
to work, and employer does not have to
provide.
Employees can still take time away from work if they want
to without drawing down accrued leave.
In fact, in many cases, employees will benefit from higher
take-home pay.
I believe that many employees will value the increase in take-home pay
and the flexibility to work and earn more if they want to.
The cost of LCP will offset incentives for employers to
casualize work.
Because this bill is technical and applies to such a range
of employment situations, I expect the committee's report will
identify areas for technical improvements.
I've encouraged stakeholders, especially those with payroll and legal
expertise, to point out technical issues, edge cases,
or unintended effects so we can address them before the bill becomes law.
In conclusion, this bill is about better results,
leave rules that people can understand, systems employers
can comply with, fewer workers missing out, and fewer
employers facing years of remediation because the law
was too hard to apply.
I appreciate the committee's work to test the details of the bill so that we do
end up with a law that is clear, workable, and durable.
Thank you very much to the committee.
Thank you. And we have a question from Camilla Bellet first.
Yeah, thank you, Minister, for your comments.
The question that I have is, and I'm pleased that you've said that you're open to
changes to the bill, because we've heard from a number of submitters this
morning, and their analysis of the bill indicates that
they'll be paid less
when they take sick leave, family violence leave, bereavement leave, and
annual leave. And at a time when workers in New Zealand are facing a
cost of living crisis, how do you justify a bill that would mean
that there is less money going to these workers when they take
annual leave or those other types of leave that I mentioned?
Yeah. So the justification for where we've landed with the policy
drafting is I originally, in good faith, did attempt to
use the Labour Party's working, which did say that
under no circumstances a worker could be worse off due to
any new legislation. I put this through Cabinet.
We put out the draft bill for consultation.
The feedback that I had back on that draft was, "Stop,
this is worse than the current law."
And so we had to go back to first principles and start again.
That was based on tripartite consensus.
And that's why we have done a different draft for this law,
because the drafting to ensure that in no
situation any worker could be worse off at any circumstance led to
such technically difficult and impossible to implement
clauses, as well for payroll systems themselves.
Many payroll providers said it would be worse for them.
So
if you take that to its logical conclusion as well,
if there is the case that no worker in any circumstance would be worse off,
that does mean that employers in all circumstances would be worse off,
because this is zero-sum. There has to be money coming from
somewhere. And so within the technical drafting that we've done,
there will be some cases where an employer would be worse
off, and in some cases where an employee will be worse off.
And so I'll list off just a couple of those, because I believe where we've ended
up with Cabinet decision is quite a balanced policy
proposition.
So for workers, there is clearly quite a benefit
for women coming back to work, having paid parental leave at
the 100% accrual rate. There's bereavement
leave from day one. There's also family violence leave from day
one.
Workers can also cash up 25% in any
particular year,
which is more than the status quo. For
employers, however, the benefit is that this is a system moving to
accrual on hours. That's easy for them to comply with.
And we have pro rata sick leave, also quite easy and straightforward.
So there is a balance I believe that we have struck.
There's quite a lot of different other technical elements that we have made policy
decisions on. But it is not the case
that there has been a win for business or a win for workers.
This is a technical law where we have worked in the element
of simplicity so that payroll systems,
as well as legal experts, HR, employers, and employees can
understand the law.
But in some particular edge cases, because I acknowledge in most
circumstances no one will notice a difference, but there will be
some edge cases where there might be some people who would see a difference in
pay. I would expect employment law with individual
contracts as well as collective bargaining provisions to
see the changes in the transition over to those laws, because I don't actually
believe that employers will want to see their workers go worse off.
Mm.
What will end up happening is in the transition over to a simpler system,
people will find other ways to recognize that
leave balance entitlement.
So just a supplementary on that. So just to clarify, the bill
that you referred to as Labour's bill was actually a
tripartite bill that was an agreement between business, the
government,
and trade unions. So it was a proposal to try and reach a consensus.
That is what I said.
Well, you said it was tripartite. That's what you said it was Labour's bill to
start with. And I guess the reason-
Well, it wasn't. Yeah. It was Labour's bill.
Well,
it was put out by the government.
Continue.
That was the first time that that was consulted on.
So-You've said that the objective here was to
reflect modern working environments, to increase certainty, and to get rid of
errors. Was it not possible for you to do that in a
way that didn't leave all of these workers that we've heard from
this morning worse off in terms of their leave pay?
Because you say that it's a fringe example or that that will happen in extreme
situations, but we've heard from worker after worker after worker
who have looked at their individual circumstance and have said that they will be
worse off under the proposals that you've made.
And you've said that there is a change in relation to parental leave,
which I think is a good change. There'll be other changes that won't be good
for women. For example,
is there any evidence that part-time workers get sick less than full-time workers?
Because under your proposal, they will receive less sick pay.
So there's quite a lot in that question.
Mm.
The main thing I would say is, from my understanding of the people that
you would've talked to this morning, I could be wrong because I wasn't here this
morning for the session,
they would be members of unions.
Mm-hmm.
My understanding of how-
But they're telling the truth, though, of their situation.
Can you just let the minister make a point?
I'm just asking to clarify if that was true.
Yeah. They are members of unions.
Yes. In the public sector.
Yes, I know.
Yes. So the way that the law has clearly been
written is that there is still the ability for collective
bargaining to take place, and I would expect that to happen in the transition
over from the old law to the new law.
I don't expect that it is the government's desire or the
union's desire that people are worse off with those
transitions over. However, what is the case is it's quite
clear that collective bargaining provisions are, in some ways,
quite difficult for the law to comply with because there are so
many clauses that have been borne out over so many years that have
led to quite complicated agreements.
I think what will actually end up happening as a result of this law change
is a simplification of many of those collective agreements as we
transition over. But I wouldn't expect to see people actually worse
off.
So can I just ask a clarifying question, and then we'll move to Phil, then we've
got Carl, and then Andrew.
When you're talking about that, because we did hear a lot in
public service and in other sort of shift-based work, I can say I've
never worked in a
job where I've had to be paid overtime, or I have had
on-call, but I actually did it for free because it was my own business.
Mm.
But that's neither here nor there.
The point is that it's
very much a type of work in the way it's currently reflected, right?
So, like entitlements and allowances.
Yes.
What you're saying is that there should be or would be
or could be a shift to the way that those contracts are
presented, rather than having that base and then all of these add-on, plus this,
plus this, plus this, plus this, that then doesn't come across in leave because
they're not actually doing that work while they're on leave.
That's right.
Might then be reflected in a different way when they're negotiating contracts in
the future.
That's right. One of the things that has become really
interesting to me, but also quite surprising, is going through this process
realizing how complicated some of those collective agreements are.
Mm-hmm.
And in many cases, I've been told that up to 40% of some
people's pay is paid out in allowances-
Mm
... rather than in base pay. That was the reason why we said,
as part of the drafting provisions, that fixed allowances are still captured
by the changes over, whereas in most circumstances,
it is simply base rate.
Yep.
Whereas because of the public sector and the vast number of
allowances that are paid there outside of what you'd consider as
base salary-
Yes
... we made sure that fixed allowances were also there, because many people in
the
medical and healthcare,
as well as education workforces, would've been
significantly worse off if we had put down just base rate
rather than base and fixed allowances.
Thank you. Phil.
So, Minister, you've characterized the bill as being kind of balanced
and technical, but actually, on the basis of the
submissions we've heard,
it's going to systematically dis-entitle people
who are casual workers, people who have
comparatively few guaranteed hours every week, people who rely
on hours they pick up from being on call and other
allowances, so that's part of their income.
One nurse told us this morning that it was going to lead to a
$2,700 a year pay cut, effectively.
She's someone who fits all of those criteria.
Now, casualization is a feature of our economy.
There are hundreds of thousands of workers in New Zealand who work under these
conditions, and your bill is going to significantly
reduce their pay.
Is that a feature of your design, or is it a bug?
I disagree with the way that you've characterized the bill.
For casual workers, in many circumstances, I see them being
better off under this law.
If you take the current pay-as-you-go provisions for a genuinely
casual workforce, that is currently paid out at 8%.
Yeah.
Under this bill, that is an increase to
12.5%. Now, there is also a balance
that I've attempted to strike with that increase
to the leave provision, which is that
through this process of developing the bill, I became quite
aware of widespread non-compliance for casual workforces
not receiving sick pay.
Whereas it is currently the law that some casual workers
are entitled to sick leave,
but it's after six months of work with 10 hours per
week.
Mm.
And a lot of businesses were not actually aware of that provision.
Mm-hmm.
Which is why I thought it would be simpler to ensure that the LCP
goes from 8% and has an increase which includes the sick leave,
so that there are not people missing out on that provision. We've made it simple.
It's not a guess for businesses whether they're in or out with their casual
workforce. But on top of that, we've also topped it up to a rounded
12.5% to ensure that it is not
cheaper for people under the system to have more casual
workers.
Mm-hmm.
So there is actually a benefit to casual workers.
But the one thing I do want to make clear is casual workers,
by definition, do not have to take work, but
their business does not also have to offer it.
That is very different, in terms of a workforce, than
an employee.
Just conscious of members needing to get to the House.
I'll jump to you, Carl, and-
Thanks, Chair. When it comes to sick leave, we've heard a lot of feedback that
people don't think it's fair or reasonable.
But do you think everyone truly understands the current status, where, for example,
if you're working
fixed half a day a week, you're essentially getting 10
times the sick leave that someone working-
A full day
... a full week is?
If you're sick on the same day every week for 10 years.
You're right. I don't believe many people do understand this provision.
It's been explained to me when I've been going out talking to companies, though,
the disincentive effect there is to actually hire
part-time people, especially the people that Camilla was talking
about earlier, about women at work.
Mm-hmm.
I have heard directly from businesses that they're
disincentivized to give job offers to people-
That's discrimination
... who are part-time, because
of the increased liability for sick leave above and
beyond what a full-time worker would receive.
Especially people who are working in retail or hospitality, where they might have
quite a lot of part-time workers. It's quite a huge leave
liability for them, and it is a disincentive effect.
Whereas I have had some correspondence that actually from one
employer in a very female dominated workforce who said
she would actually hire more women because of the pro rata
sick leave component that we've put into the policy
draftings.
Yes.
Great.
Andrew, and then we'll-
Yeah, just quickly. Obviously previous to this role I
was employing people for a long, long time, and I always found
working out leave absolute nightmare in terms of trying
to do the calculations. What have you heard from the private
sector? Obviously, like yourself, I found
the complexity of these public sector contracts quite amazing.
Mm-hmm.
And to me, it seems like a real shame that
the private sector gets held back from having simple and smart stuff to do
because we've got to accommodate crazy agreements in the public
sector.
What have you heard from the private sector?
The private sector by and large has been very supportive.
One of the reasons why I went down this path of work
was because I heard from the business community that this was the top
priority that they wanted the government to solve.
And they've been wanting this solved for such a long time, that I think it is
important for our government to solve this issue once and for all.
But the important point I would also make is talking to some of the
business owners or managers or HR, as well as payroll
experts,
they have actually been willing to deal with some of the trade-offs that we
have made in the bill. They acknowledge that there is an increase
in the LCP from pay as you go.
They've
acknowledged that there would be
potentially more costs with
sick leave up front, family violence bereavement leave
up front. But they've been willing to have those as part of the
trade-off of receiving the pro rata sick leave and accrual on
hours. I do acknowledge that there are some business owners out there who are
still not happy with the 12.5% increase, but I
would ask the committee to look at that one in detail
as to whether or not you believe that I and Cabinet reached the right
decision in where we landed with the particular percentage.
Mm-hmm.
I believe that we have. However, it is more of a political
calculation, given that it is
over to Cabinet to make that particular percentage.
Mm-hmm. Phil, did you want to-
Yeah
... your question?
So New Zealand workers work longer hours than almost anyone else in the
OECD, but part-time and casualized workers under your
bill are going to get less paid time off.
How do you feel about that, given the purpose of the act is to ensure people have
paid time off?
Well, if you think of casual workers, they're not guaranteed any particular time
off anyway.
But they still work, Minister.
Can we just let the minister answer the question?
Every relies on casual workers.
Do you want to hear the answer, Phil?
They just don't have a guarantee of them. They still work those hours.
Okay. So I think you just have a completely different view of
how this law will function.
For the law to function, people need to have in their contracts what their standard
hours are, or to have additional hours or casual hours.
For the casual hours, it is clear, and has
always been the case, that an employer does not have to offer casual
hours, and an employee does not have to take casual hours.
That does not mean that on any particular time or month
or week, that people specifically know when they would be taking
leave. Which is why I believe it is a better option,
not to have accrual for potentially time off at
some future point where you're not sure if you're going to be taking that day off
or not. But to have an upfront payment,
in lieu of the leave will be better.
And I suspect for quite a lot of student workers, in
particular, who'll be wanting to do casual work over summer,
and then
potentially just go back off to uni.
If you are in one of those circumstances, you actually get more take
home pay that you can use at the time that you wish to
choose,
rather than having that accrued and stored by your employer.
Mm-hmm.
So I actually think some people will see a benefit in having that higher take home
pay.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Minister, and your officials, for making yourself
available to us this morning.
Thank you.
Appreciate it. And look forward to hearing the rest of our submissions.